All Debates Are Bravery Debates
I don
t practice what I preach because I
m not the kind of person I
m preaching to.
 


 Bob Dobbs
I.
I read Atlas Shrugged probably about a decade ago. I was impressed with its defense of capitalism, which really hammers home the reasons it
s good and important on a gut level. But I was equally turned off by its promotion of selfishness as a moral ideal. I thought that was *basically* just being a jerk. After all, if there
s one thing the world doesn
t need (I thought) it
s more selfishness.
Then I talked to a friend who told me Atlas Shrugged had changed his life. That he
d been raised in a really strict family that had told him that ever enjoying himself was selfish and made him a bad person, that he had to be working at every moment to make his family and other people happy or else let them shame him to pieces. And the revelation that it was sometimes okay to consider your own happiness gave him the strength to stand up to them and turn his life around, while still keeping the basic human instinct of helping others when he wanted to and he felt they deserved it (as, indeed, do Rand characters).
II.
The religious and the irreligious alike enjoy making fun of Reddit
s r/atheism, which combines an extreme strawmanning of religious positions with childish insults and distasteful triumphalism. Recently the moderators themselves have become a bit embarrassed by it and instituted some rules intended to tone things down, leading to 
some
 
of
 
the
 
most
 
impressive
 
Internet
 
drama
 I have ever seen. In its midst, some people started talking about what the old strawmanning triumphalist r/atheism meant to them (see for example 
here
).
A lot of them were raised in religious families where they would have been disowned if they had admitted to their atheism. Some of them 
were
 disowned for admitting to atheism, or lost boyfriends/girlfriends, or were terrified they might go to Hell. And then they found r/atheism, and saw people making fun of religion, and insulting it, in really REALLY offensive ways. And no one was striking them down with lightning. No one was shouting them down. No one was doing much of anything at all. And to see this taboo violated in the most shocking possible way with no repercussions sort of broke the spell for them, like as long as people were behaving respectfully to religion, even respectfully disagreeing, it still had this aura of invincibility about it, but if some perfectly normal person can post a a stupid comic where Jesus has gay sex with Mohammed, then there
s this whole other world out there where religion holds no power. 
Gilbert
 tells the story of how when, as a young Christian struggling with doubt, he would read r/atheism to remind himself that atheists could be pretty awful. r/atheism is doing a bad job at being the sort of people who can convert Gilbert, and the new mods
 policy of 
you should have more civil and intellectual discussions
 might work better on him. I think it would work better on me too.
But there is 
 previously unappreciated by me 
 a large population of people for whom really dumb offensive strawmannish memes are 
exactly what they need
.
III.
My last night in Berkeley, I went to a CFAR party where someone (can
t remember who) was talking about his experiences in Landmark Forum, a self-improvement workshop. He said their 
modus operandi
 was to get people to take responsibility for the outcome of their actions. His example was an office worker who always did substandard work, and was always making excuses like 
My boss doesn
t s support me
 or 
My computer system isn
t good enough
 or 
My coworkers aren
t pulling their fair share.
 Landmark  says those kinds of excuses are what
s keeping you back. And they taught (again, according to this one person) that the solution was to treat everything that happens in your life as your responsiblity 
 no excuses, just 
it was my fault
 or 
it
s to my credit
.
Which is probably a really good idea for this guy in his one job. But someone else at the party pointed out that there are situations where this heuristic is horrible. Like if you
re a teenager trying to cope with the trauma of your parents
 divorce.
(Around the same time, I saw the same idea expressed as a Rationality Quote 
on Less Wrong
: 
Bad things don
t happen to you because you
re unlucky. Bad things happen to you because you
re a dumbass.
 Eliezer went a good deal of the way to correcting it by rephrasing to 
Single bad things happen to you at random. Iterated bad things happen to you because you
re a dumbass.
 But I would go further and add 
Or because you
re a minority. Or because you live in an awful place, like the ghetto, or North Korea. Or because there
s a war going on. Or because you have a disease, either somatic or psychiatric. Or because of any of the thousand and one other reasons why you might consistently have bad things happen to you that aren
t your fault.
)
And only a few days after the party, I was reading a book on therapy which contained the phrase (I copied it down to make sure I got it right) 
Don
t be so hard on yourself. No one else is as hard on yourself as you are. You are your own worst critic.
Notice that this encodes the 
exact opposite assumption
. Landmark claims its members are biased against ever thinking ill of themselves, even when they deserve it. The therapy book claims that patients are biased towards always thinking ill of themselves, even when they do deserve it.
And you know, both claims are probably spot on. There are definitely people who are too hard on themselves. Ozy (previously on my blogroll) has done an amazing job of getting me and many other people inclined towards skepticism about feminist and transgender issues, engaging with us, and gradually convincing us to be more respectful and aware through sheer kindness and willingness to engage people reasonably on every part of the political spectrum. Two days ago some people on Twitter 
 who were angry Ozy said one need not boycott everything Orson Scott Card has ever written just because he
s against gay marriage 
 told Ozy ze wasn
t a real transgender person and suggested lots of people secretly disliked zir. And instead of doing what I would do and telling the trolls to go to hell, Ozy freaked out and worried ze was doing everything wrong and 
decided to delete
 everything ze had ever written online. I 
know
 Ozy is zir own worst critic and if that therapy book was aimed at people like zir, it was entirely correct to say what it said.
On the other hand, I look at people like 
Amy
s Baking Company
, who are obviously terrible people, who get a high-status professional chef as well as thousands of random joes informing them of exactly what they are doing wrong, who are 
so clearly in the wrong
 that it seems impossible not to realize it 
 and who then go on to attribute the negativity to a 
conspiracy
 against them and deny any wrongdoing. They could probably use some Landmark.
IV.
In a recent essay, 
Against Bravery Debates
, I think I underestimated an important reason why some debates 
have to
 be bravery debates.
Suppose there are two sides to an issue. Be more or less selfish. Post more or less offensive atheist memes. Be more or less willing to blame and criticize yourself.
There are some people who need to hear both sides of the issue. Some people really need to hear the advice 
It
s okay to be selfish sometimes!
 Other people really need to hear the advice 
You are being way too selfish and it
s not okay.
It
s really hard to target advice at exactly the people who need it. You can
t go around giving everyone surveys to see how selfish they are, and give half of them 
Atlas Shrugged
 and half of them 
the collected works of Peter Singer
. You can
t even write really complicated books on how to tell whether you need more or less selfishness in your life 
 they
re not going to be as buyable, as readable, 
or
 as memorable as 
Atlas Shrugged
. To a first approximation, all you can do is saturate society with pro-selfishness or anti-selfishness messages, and realize you
ll be hurting a select few people while helping the majority.
But in this case, it makes a really big deal what the majority actually is.
Suppose an Objectivist argues 
Our culture has become too self-sacrificing! Everyone is told their entire life that the only purpose of living is to work for other people. As a result, people are miserable and no one is allowed to enjoy themselves at all.
 If they
re right, then helping spread Objectivism is probably a good idea 
 it will help these legions of poor insufficiently-selfish people, but there will be very few too-selfish-already people who will be screwed up by the advice.
But suppose Peter Singer argues 
We live in a culture of selfishness! Everyone is always told to look out for number one, and the poor are completely neglected!
 Well, then we want to give everyone the collected works of Peter Singer so we can solve this problem, and we don
t have to worry about accidentally traumatizing the poor self-sacrificing people more, because we
ve already agreed there aren
t very many of these at all.
It
s much easier to be charitable in political debates when you view the two participants as coming from two different cultures that err on opposite sides, each trying to propose advice that would help their own culture, each being tragically unaware that the other culture exists. 
A lot of the time this happens when one person is from a dysfunctional community and suggesting very strong measures against some problem the community faces, and the other person is from a functional community and thinks the first person is being extreme, fanatical or persecutory. 
This happens a lot among, once again, atheists. One guy is like 
WE NEED TO DESTROY RELIGION IT CORRUPTS EVERYTHING IT TOUCHES ANYONE WHO MAKES ANY COMPROMISES WITH IT IS A TRAITOR KILL KILL KILL.
 And the other guy is like 
Hello? Religion may not be literally true, but it usually just makes people feel more comfortable and inspires them to do nice things and we don
t want to look like huge jerks here.
 Usually the first guy was raised Jehovah
s Witness and the second guy was raised 
Moralistic Therapeutic Deist
.
But I
ve also sometimes had this issue when I talk to feminists. They
re like 
Guys need to be more concerned about women
s boundaries, and women need to be willing to shame and embarrass guys who hit on them inappropriately.
 And maybe 
they
 spent high school hanging out with bros on the football team who thought asking women
s consent was a boring technicality, and 
I
 spent high school hanging out entirely with extremely considerate but very shy geeks who spent their teenage years in a state of nightmarish loneliness and depression because they were 
too scared
 to ask out women because the woman might try to shame and embarrass them for it.
And the big one is trust. There are so many people from extremely functional communities saying that people need to be more trusting and kind and take people at their word more often, and so many people from dysfunctional communities saying that
s not how it works. Both are no doubt backed by ample advice from their own lives.
A blog like this one probably should promote the opinions and advice most likely to be underrepresented in the blog-reading populace (which is 
totally different
 from the populace at large). But this might convince 
thought leaders
, who then use it to inspire change in the populace at large, which will probably be in the wrong direction. I think most of my friends are too leftist but society as a whole is too rightist 
 should I spread leftist or rightist memes among my friends?
I feel pretty okay about both being sort of a libertarian and writing 
an essay arguing against libertarianism
, because the world generally isn
t libertarian enough but the sorts of people who read long online political essays generally are way more libertarian than can possibly be healthy.
